CAFA5 PARTIAL-KNOWLEDGE PROVENANCE AND FUSION PROTOCOL

Pinned references
-----------------
Evaluation data and released baselines:
  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20186533
Official partial-knowledge evaluator:
  https://github.com/claradepaolis/CAFA-evaluator-PK
CAFA5 analysis preprint:
  https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.27.716980

Exact archive checksums, evaluator revision, and evaluation arguments are in
benchmark_manifest.json. A run is invalid if pin verification fails.

Scope
-----
This suite evaluates whether dependence-aware evidence fusion with inspectable
provenance improves protein-function prediction on the official CAFA5
partial-knowledge task. The official CAFA evaluator is the scoring authority.
CeTTa derives leaf evidence routes and is the load-bearing grouped reducer that
emits aggregation certificates.
Leaf-route counts alone remain integration checks and must not be described as
proofs of fusion correctness; reducer certificates and differential parity are
separate executable obligations.

Data boundary
-------------
Known annotations are frozen at the CAFA5 submission cutoff (2023-08-14).
Final ground truth consists of newly acquired annotations through 2025-03.
The final ground-truth file may be read only by target selection and evaluation
code. It must not be used to fit source calibration, dependence groups, rule
strengths, thresholds, or fusion parameters.

Prediction packet
-----------------
Each source prediction becomes:

  (cafa-prediction SOURCE GROUP PROTEIN GO-TERM SCORE)

SOURCE identifies the concrete predictor and pinned version. GROUP identifies
a declared dependence class, such as shared embeddings, homology data, training
annotations, or model family. SCORE must be finite and in [0, 1]. This interval
does not by itself make a score a probability. Uncalibrated scores remain
ordinal.

Primary fusion
--------------
Within each (protein, term, dependence-group), keep the maximum source score.
Across dependence groups, also keep the maximum. This conservative-max policy
is the preregistered primary configuration. It requires no claim that predictor
scores are probabilities or that source groups are independent.

Calibrated alternative
----------------------
Noisy-OR may be evaluated as a named alternative only when every source has a
pinned calibration artifact fitted without final labels and every cross-group
pair has an explicit independence declaration:

  1 - product(1 - calibrated_probability[group])

The run records calibration identifiers and artifact hashes. Missing
calibration or independence evidence is an error, not an implicit assumption.
The declaration is JSON schema version 1 with policy
"calibrated-noisy-or", a calibrations object keyed by source, and an
independent_group_pairs array. Each calibration entry contains calibration_id,
artifact (a path relative to the declaration), and artifact_sha256. The suite
reads each artifact, verifies its hash, and applies its executable transform
before within-group maximum and noisy-OR. A calibration artifact is JSON schema
version 1 with the same calibration_id, method "logistic", and finite numeric
slope and intercept; slope must be positive. Placeholder or identity-by-omission
artifacts are rejected.

Duplicate semantics
-------------------
Within one named source, repeated rows for the same protein-term candidate are
idempotently collapsed only when their scores are identical. Conflicting scores
for the same source and candidate invalidate the run. Distinct sources remain
distinct packets, then dependence-group maximum prevents repeated or closely
related evidence from being counted additively.

Positive example
----------------
Two calibrated sources in explicitly declared independent groups support the
same protein-term pair. Both group maxima may contribute to the named
calibrated-noisy-OR alternative, and both provenance routes remain inspectable.

Negative example
----------------
Two predictors use the same ProtT5 embeddings and annotation snapshot. They
belong to one dependence group. Adding the lower-scored source must not change
the fused prediction.

Evaluation and metric naming
----------------------------
The official evaluator is run with the pinned ontology, terms of interest,
information accretion, known annotations, partial-knowledge ground truth,
ancestor propagation mode "fill", threshold step 0.001, CAFA normalization,
and orphan exclusion. Raw official TSV outputs are preserved byte-for-byte. A
separate canonical summary sorts semantic rows before hashing so its digest is
independent of filesystem traversal order.

The evaluator emits both unweighted s and information-accretion-weighted s_w.
This suite reports their minima explicitly as unweighted semantic-distance
minimum and weighted semantic-distance minimum. The weighted result is selected
directly from s_w; an evaluator file named evaluation_best_s.tsv is not
relabelled as weighted S-min. Final reporting also includes F-max, weighted
F-max, coverage, bootstrap intervals over proteins, and separate calibration
and selective-risk analyses whose positive-unlabelled limitation is stated.

Smoke versus full results
-------------------------
The deterministic smoke slice tests data integrity, no-test-label leakage,
CeTTa leaf-route production, dependence-group behavior, TSV export, and
evaluator integration. Its scores are not benchmark results. Only a frozen
run-full evaluation may be reported as biological performance. Published or
released predictor outputs are input controls, not results of our experiment.
Learned calibration or fusion components are trained by us using eligible
pre-final-label data and are evaluated without post-test retuning.

Executable entry points
-----------------------
Run the local semantic and regression checks with:

  make BUILD=python test-cafa5-pln

Verify an installed CAFA data/evaluator pair with:

  python3 benchmarks/cafa5_pln/cafa5_suite.py verify \
    --data-root DATA_ROOT --evaluator-root EVALUATOR_REPOSITORY

The run-smoke command constructs a deterministic real-data slice, checks every
prediction packet through CeTTa's typed goal chainer, checks single-source
fusion identity, and invokes the official evaluator. The
run-multisource-smoke command subsets sources to the same proteins, records
source-level provenance trails, applies the requested fusion policy, and
evaluates the source and fused files together.

The run-full command is deliberately separate. It consumes complete frozen
prediction sources, applies conservative-max by default, evaluates the full
fused prediction set, and records source hashes. CeTTa group-fold is the
load-bearing reducer; SQLite remains an independently implemented differential
oracle. Every CeTTa fusion also compares a deterministic sample of up to 64
real input proteins against SQLite and fails if candidate keys or scores differ.
Prediction packets are deterministically partitioned by protein, then read
through CeTTa's incremental fs:stream-atom-lines direct-visitor source. Each
shard preserves group-fold count/SHA-256 certificates; Python independently
checks certificate counts against the packet and group frontiers. Shard outputs
are merged in canonical candidate order without silently falling back to
SQLite. The source reader uses O(maximum line length) memory. Reducer results
and the Python packet map remain O(packets in one shard); the default hard cap is
500,000 packets and exceeding it fails loudly with guidance to add shards.
